Understanding the Equipment
Brake Systems
Safety first.
When working in the shop,
always follow the safety guidelines
provided in service information,
tool operation manuals,
and other technical literature.
To protect yourself from injury,
wear personal protective equipment (PPE),
dress appropriately, work professionally,
and correctly handle tools and equipment.
The modern brake system uses mechanical,
hydraulic, and electronic components to slow
and stop the vehicle.
This video will introduce you to the components
and operation of the brake system.
Braking begins when the driver presses on
the brake pedal.
The pedal is a lever,
which increases the force applied by the driver
against the brake push-rod.
The movement of the pedal,
which is monitored by the brake pedal
position sensor, activates the brake lights.
Pedal movement is also used for the antilock
brake system,
the electronic stability control system,
transmission control, and other systems.
The movement of the push-rod forces the pistons
in the master cylinder forward.
This pressurizes the fluid in the cylinder.
The fluid passes through the antilock brake
hydraulic control unit,
which supplies the brake fluid to the calipers
and wheel cylinders located
at the wheel brake assemblies.
All modern cars and trucks have disc brakes
at the front wheels.
The disc brakes consist of a caliper,
a brake rotor, and brake pads.
The most common type of disc brake
is the floating caliper design.
When the brakes are applied,
brake fluid exerts pressure against
the back of the caliper piston.
This causes the piston to move out of its bore.
This force is applied against the inner brake pad.
Because the caliper floats
on its mounting hardware,
the outward movement of the piston forces the
caliper body backward, which squeezes the
outer pad against the brake rotor.
The clamping action of the pads against the rotor
creates a lot of friction and heat.
The friction slows the rotation of the rotor,
wheel, and tire,
and the heat is dissipated into the air.
Another type of disc brake design uses a fixed
or stationary caliper. In this arrangement,
the caliper is bolted in place,
and pistons located on either side of the rotor
apply pressure against the pads.
This type of brake is often found in
high-performance applications.
Drum brakes are an expanding-brake design.
When the brakes are applied,
fluid pushes the two pistons in the
wheel cylinder outward.
This forces the brake shoes
outward against the inside of the brake drum.
Springs pull the shoes back
when the driver releases the brake.
The parking brake is a mechanical or
electromechanical system
that locks the rear brakes
once the vehicle is parked.
Until recently,
most vehicles had a completely
mechanical system,
using steel cables to connect the parking brake
handle or pedal to the rear brakes.
Many newer models
use electronic parking brakes.
These systems use electric motors
to pull the cables or to activate a parking brake
mechanism in the rear disc brake calipers.
The antilock brake system, or ABS,
is used to keep the wheels from staying locked,
which allows the driver
to maintain steering control while braking.
Modern vehicles incorporate the ABS
with traction and stability control systems
to help with overall vehicle handling
and control over many different types of
operating conditions.
Now, enter the simulation
for more onbrake system components
and operation.